Over the last couple of years with
working with the developers and
working with Apple's engineering team,
we've learned a lot about what
Mass Storage device drivers need to do
and what we were doing wrong in Mac OS 9.
So hopefully you'll find with what
we're doing in 10 to be a much more
powerful solution for you to create
device drivers without necessarily
needing to write the entire driver.
You can leverage off of major
portions of ours and to sort of
describe that overall architecture,
I'd like to bring up Craig Marciniak.
Craig?
Good evening, I'm Craig Marciniak,
Senior Engineer at Apple.
I've been working on Mass Storage in
X for about a year now.
And tonight we're going to
delve in and get into all the
details of that architecture.
I've partitioned this talk
into really two pieces:
third party hardware vendors that want
to bring their hardware to the platform,
and utility writers and people
that need to talk to hardware
from application space.
The second group that want to talk to
applications from user space will find
the first half semi-interesting because
it exposes how things work in the kernel,
which will help you understand and debug
talking to those drivers from user space.
So we're going to really expose and get
into the details of the architecture.
I'll do this mostly by showing how
the driver stack is instantiated,
how to subclass support
for given devices,
how to talk to drivers.
How to talk to those
devices from user space.
And most importantly,
how to get more information.
And if there's time at the end,
we'll do some Q&A.
How many people here have a
comfortable understanding of
the basic concepts in I/O Kit?
That's about what I expected.
So drivers are kernel extensions.
We refer to them as KEX.
They're written in a restricted subset of
C++ that is most notably missing RTTI and
Templates, Multiple Inheritance,
and Exceptions.
Thank you.
I/O Kit makes a big distinction
between family versus drivers.
Families are an encapsulation of
all the commonality and drivers
in the vernacular of I/O Kit are
really instances of device specific
things that you would subclass over.
I'm going to keep refining that.
It may seem a little repetitive,
but it's really an important concept.
I've been doing drivers in 9Space for a
decade and when I hear the word driver,
I tend to think of this monolithic
giant driver that encompasses a lot
more than what drivers mean in I/O Kit.
We refer to them as leaf
classes of the family.
Another concept that's really
important is the registry.
A registry is a dynamic database.
It's a tree that contains
a whole bunch of properties
that get filled up over time.
And these properties are used for
matching so that devices and objects
can be instantiated and built up.
There's some other sessions this
week that go into detail and
depth and they'll be enumerated
at the end of this presentation.
There's some appropriate URLs sprinkled
through this and summarized at the end.
uh... there's a
New book that just got released
called Inside Mac OS X:
The Kernel Environment that has a very
good overview of I/O Kit concepts.
And finally, there's always Darwin.
I've spent a lot of
time reading the header,
especially of ioservice.h and looking
at the implementations in ioservice.cpp,
which really can help a lot.
I'm going to put the whole
thing into context here.
We have devices that we find
and the first layer is the
physical interconnect layer.
This layer encompasses a
whole bunch of a collection of
objects of bus specific things.
These are the SCSI drivers,
the SCSI bus drivers,
the controller drivers, excuse me,
the firewire controller drivers,
the USB controller drivers,
and all the objects that are
needed to support that layer.
The transport driver layer is
where requests get packaged up
and turned into commands to go
down to the appropriate bus.
We're going to go into more
detail in that in a minute.
The device services
layer is a generic layer.
It contains partitioners
and a generic driver.
And then finally we have,
the yellow line there represents
the user kernel boundary and
above that we have clients,
ultimately your applications.
So we're going to zoom in
and get into the details of
the transport driver layer.
Historically,
we were looking at 9 and we had
a sense of deja vu because we
kept pretty much writing the
same driver over and over again.
And we had no reusability and
invariably there were subtleties in
implementation from one interpretation
of how to do this and that and another.
And over time, all kinds of metadata
bled into those drivers.
Partition information, special commands,
special control and status calls.
And we're going to be able to
finally get away from that.
What we did in 10 is we had a chance
to really reuse that commonality.
We wanted to reuse that commonality.
I/O Kit gave us an object
framework to actually achieve that.
So we were discussing how
are we going to do this.
And it turns out that there was a
formal document that served as a
really good guideline to do this.
It's called SAM.
SAM is a SCSI architectural model.
And I want to stop and
make a distinction here.
When I say SAM and I mean SCSI in the
sense of SCSI architectural model,
I'm not referring to SCSI hardware.
I'm not talking about SCSI hard drives.
I'm not talking about SCSI scanners.
I'm not talking about anything.
When I mean that, I'll say SCSI parallel.
So SAM was this wonderful document
that really was a blueprint for
us to do exactly what we wanted
to achieve by implementing and
specifying a partitioning of the
command sets in the internet protocols.
Not internet, interconnect protocols.
You can go to the URL in the
bottom to get more information
in the formal SAM document.
When we started on SAM a year ago,
I believe we were using Draft 5.
And it has been,
it is not ratified at this point,
but it is definitely farther
than when we started.
Another thing is half the challenge
of understanding this is getting
the subtleties of all the language.
We used a lot of the wording and
terminology out of the SAM document
in our class and implementation.
So that's where all this comes from.
So,
The Transport Driver layer is
split into two natural layers.
The SCSI Protocol layer,
which is bus specific,
and the SCSI Application layer,
which is device specific.
What I mean by that is,
We ship bus specific drivers for USB,
TAPI, Firewire,
bus specific stuff at the protocol layer.
And we expand this other layer
into the SCSI application layer.
We have this peripheral device type nub.
The peripheral device type nub's job in
life is to really send an inquiry command
down to the device and discover what
kind of peripheral device type it is.
Is it going to be one of
the peripheral device types?
In Kernel we have above
that a logical unit driver.
We have a peripheral device
type 00 which is block storage,
peripheral device type
5 which is multimedia,
7 which is magneto-optical,
and E which is reduced block commands.
So what happens is the peripheral
device type nub populates the registry
with the peripheral device type type
so that it's not just a block type.
a logical unit driver can be
instantiated appropriately.
So there's one other thing above that,
and it's the service device layer.
And this is just some linkage
objects that link the logical
unit driver to the appropriate
generic system driver above it.
In a typical instance,
what will happen is,
let's say we have plugged
a device into the USB bus,
that we would instantiate an
I/O USB Mass Storage Class Protocol
driver,
which would in turn instantiate
the peripheral device nub,
which would in turn query and
populate the registry with
the appropriate device type,
and if it was a block storage device,
in the case of a hard drive,
a peripheral device type 00 logical
unit driver would be instantiated.
So up until this point,
I've only been talking about the
functional stacking and layering of
how all these pieces interrelate.
You have to work with
me here a little bit.
This slide may be kind
of confusing at first.
A little bit of convention context here.
These puzzle pieces aren't components,
they're not extensions, they're objects.
This is just an object hierarchy.
You usually see them as ovals.
I don't know if you can tell,
but the darker purple means
that it's a concrete class,
excuse me, an abstract class,
and the lighter purple
are concrete classes.
Now, at the SCSI protocol layer,
the base class is
I/O SCSI protocol services.
We subclass a family for
a given bus off that.
So if we wanted to support SCSI,
we would do an I/O SCSI parallel
transport subclass of the
I/O SCSI protocol services.
The next layer in the stack is the
SCSI application layer object hierarchy.
Here are basically the pieces that
represent the logical unit drivers.
So in the case of a block storage driver,
the peripheral device type 00 is
subclassed off of the SCSI block commands
device and the base class in this layer
is the I/O SCSI primary commands device.
So I'm going to bring this all
kind of together right now.
Here's an example of a FireWire drive.
At the physical interconnect layer,
the appropriate objects are
instantiated and built up.
What I'm showing here is this
driver stack to the left and the
object hierarchy works this way.
So what will happen is once the
appropriate objects have been built up,
a peripheral SCSI protocol
driver will be instantiated.
The base family will be
I/O Firewire/CeoBus protocol transport,
which in turn instantiates
that peripheral device nub,
which in turn would
[Transcript missing]
Now this is the magic slide
here to put this all together.
I keep referencing the subclassing and
exactly really what does that mean,
how does it fit into context.
When we subclass something,
in this case we're going to subclass the
Peripheral Device Type 00
driver with my device subclass.
All we're doing is inserting a
new leaf class and shifting the
object hierarchy to the right.
So if I want to subclass and add some
support to the SCSI protocol layer,
I would simply subclass the IO Firewire
Serial Bus Protocol Transport that would,
when we instantiated the stack,
that is the name that would
actually show up in the registry,
and we would shift that
hierarchy one to the right.
So, matching is really important.
The matching heuristics are a little
bit different in implementation,
given on what layer you're on.
The highest probe score wins.
At the...
In the previous slide,
above the peripheral device
type nub and where the logical
unit driver gets instantiated,
we have this kind of matching logic.
The peripheral device type
chooses what logical unit driver,
if any, is going to get instantiated.
Then if we have a vendor match,
the probe score goes up.
If we have a product ID,
the score goes even higher.
And then finally,
if we have a revision ID,
we've actually honed in to a
specific instance of a device that
we want to add certain support for.
Sometimes you want to refer
to the previous matching,
that's all passive matching,
just using the properties
that are in the registry tree.
Sometimes you need to have
active matching in which
we override a probe method.
Overriding probe,
sometimes you might have a property that
has some bits scrolled the way up and you
have to mask them out and pull them out
to determine what kind of device you are.
You'll know your requirements
more than we will.
Be careful if you use probe not
to reference or count on the state
of member variables because other
potential candidate drivers could
be loaded and could have changed
the state of the device behind you.
To see an example of how all this works,
you can look in Apple FireWire
Mass Storage Drivers.
There's a good example of overriding
probe that's quite extensive.
Now for me, the best thing,
I come to WWDC, I see the slides,
and it all starts with the data.
It all seems pretty and makes some sense,
but it's kind of abstract.
And I learned the most by standing
over a competent engineer's
shoulders and watching him do it.
And that's what we're
going to do right now.
We're actually going to go in,
I'm going to bring up Chris Sarcone,
and we're going to subclass
a logical unit driver.
Thanks, Craig.
If we could bring up demo one, please.
All right.
So I'm going to go ahead
and fire up Project Builder.
We're going to go ahead
and create a subclass of a
peripheral device type driver.
So we're going to create a new project.
We're going to scroll down
here and choose I/O Kit Driver.
And we're going to call
this MyLogicalUnitDriver.
Okay, Project Builder goes ahead
and creates us a new project.
And inside here it'll place a
dummy header file and a C++ file.
What we want to do is we want to go
over to the Targets pane right now and
take a look at the bundle settings.
Craig just went into some details
about how we do matching and
how a driver gets instantiated.
We do this by creating an
I/O Kit personality inside of our text.
So what I'm going to go ahead and do here
is create a new child and we're going
to call this child MyLogicalUnitDriver.
if I could type and the
I/O Kit personality is a dictionary.
Inside of it we will have more
properties which we will add.
So I'm going to go ahead and change
that to a dictionary and I'm going to
create a whole bunch of properties here.
From experience I know I need
to create six properties here.
Depending on what type of driver
you write you will need to add more
properties or have less properties.
It all depends on what kind
of driver you're writing.
The first item that should
be inside of your personality
is the CFBundle identifier.
Since we are going to load a code
fragment from this bundle that
we've created we're going to paste
the same CFBundle identifier in.
You can of course have a personality
which loads code from another module.
If you do do that then you need to make
sure that you have the correct code.
The next property that we
need to add is an IOClass.
We need to instantiate a particular
class when we load our kernel extension.
So we're going to put in my
logical unit driver because
that will be our class name.
The next thing that I/O Kit needs
for matching is a provider class.
This tells I/O Kit to consider your
driver for every instance of this class.
The class that we want to attach to is
the I/O SCSI Peripheral Device node.
Now, this is where IO Kit's generic
matching services stop,
and this is where the
I/O SCSI architecture model
family-specific matching begins.
Craig mentioned that we score
on peripheral device type first,
so we need to specify a
peripheral device type.
Which is of course a number.
Now if you want to subclass
a block command device,
you would want to have a zero here.
I don't have one of those
devices here on this machine,
but I do have a CD-ROM drive and that
shows up as a peripheral device type 5.
So we're going to go ahead and subclass
the CD-ROM driver for this machine.
The next two properties that we need
to have are a vendor identification
and a product identification.
Now, to find these values,
we need to look in the I/O Kit registry.
I'm going to go ahead and
fire up terminal and type
ioreg-c ioskzperforaldevicenub.
This goes ahead and prints
out the contents of the
I/O SCSI peripheral device nub entry.
What I am interested in here are the
vendor identification right here,
which says this is a Pioneer drive.
So I'm going to go ahead and
copy paste that directly into
my vendor identification here.
And then it also tells me
the product identification.
I'm going to paste that
into my driver here.
Now, if you wanted a driver that
matched on all Pioneer drives,
you could of course remove this product
identification property and take your
chances that your driver will match.
Of course, if somebody had a Pioneer
DVD-RW-DVR-103 driver,
that would get considered for
matching before yours would.
So,
for vendor and product identification,
it's very important that you have
those keys in there to get your
driver considered for matching.
Now,
if you only want to match on a specific
firmware revision for the device,
you could also add that in,
and that is the product revision level,
which you would see right here.
We're not going to add that key today.
So, that is it with our personality here.
A couple more properties that
we need to add to our text
are the OS bundle libraries.
This key allows you to specify
families that you require to have
your module loaded into the kernel.
I know from experience that I need
to have two of such modules.
One is the OS bundle library.
ComApple I/O Kit:
I/O SCSI Architecture Model.
And the other one is...
IOSCSI Multimedia Commands Device.
And in the string category here,
you just put the revision level of
that kernel extension that you require.
Both of these can be 100 for now.
And the last piece that we
need is to make sure that
we get loaded at boot time.
So to add that key,
we have OS Bundle required.
and that is local-root.
If you need more specifics on
what each of these properties
does and which ones are required,
I ask you to consult the inside
Mac OS X kernel extension or-- is it
inside kernel or kernel extension?
One of those books has the
correct information and of course
you can reference the website.
And now we need to actually
write some code for this driver.
We can go ahead and add code to
subclass a particular function.
We can go ahead and add code to write an
entire logical unit driver if we want.
What I'm going to do is actually open
up some prefab files that I did already.
And I'm going to copy paste that into
As you can see we're working with
a peripheral device type 05 driver
which is a CD-ROM driver and
I'm most familiar and most comfortable
with the read table of contents command.
So I have decided to subclass the read
talk command and inside the C++ file,
all I've done is add a status log.
The status log here is and will print
out an IOLOG message to the system log.
So when this driver gets loaded,
anytime we do a read
table of contents command,
it will get spit out to the console.
And we can go ahead here and build this.
And it succeeded in building
our kernel extension,
so let's go ahead and put it
on this machine and load it.
And I'll go ahead and copy this over.
So I'm going to copy the directory into
The extensions folder.
We're going to go ahead and reboot
this machine and you will see
that it is really that easy to
subclass and add vendor specific
functionality to your device,
or for your device rather.
There was already a driver loaded
for the CD-ROM driver here.
Of course, if we had a FireWire
drive or a USB drive,
which we could dynamically
load a driver for,
we could have loaded the
driver into the kernel.
And as long as it was
the kernel extension,
the I/O Kit personality
matched for that drive,
we could definitely load for that drive.
So as soon as this starts up here,
I'll go ahead and pop up terminal again.
You'll see that in the IR registry,
our driver will be
loaded for this computer.
So let me go into a couple of reasons
as to why you might want to subclass.
You might want to subclass a logical
unit driver to add some sort of
functionality to your device,
like say you have password protection
or say you're developing a product that
has SDMI support in it and you want
to send those commands to your drive.
That would be a very good reason to
just subclass the generic support that
we bring to the table with the generic
I/O functionality and then just add your
vendor specific functionality to it.
And you'll see here,
my logical unit driver got loaded
right above the peripheral device node.
So with that,
I'll turn this back over to Craig.
He can finish his presentation.
Thanks a lot, Chris.
Okay, I hope that made sense.
So close to it,
it's sometimes hard to know if we're
actually telling you what you need
or making too many assumptions.
So up until this point we've
talked really about instantiating
the stack and all the pieces
that get put together for that.
We've gone into the hierarchy,
the object hierarchy of
those functional pieces.
There are other objects
in the SAM implementation
that we need to talk about.
The SCSI task is a very important object.
A SCSI task is an encapsulation of a CDB,
data buffers, error information,
just about everything you need to
take and actually process a CDB and
A really good place to understand what
we mean by this is basically what we've
done is we've made an object out of the
SCSI command model in the SAM document,
which is Chapter 5.
In fact, the names come right out of
the guidelines in that chapter.
So another thing we provide
is this command builders.
These are utility classes that build up
command set specific commands for you.
Obviously we have block commands
for peripheral device type 00
and the multimedia MMC commands
and reduced block commands.
In the future if a new set of commands
come out you would want to probably
build a utility class for that.
So how are SCSI tasks processed?
We've talked about just instantiating
and building these stacks up.
So what happens?
An I/O request is going to come in
from the system for something and
it's going to get into the transport
driver layer and it's going to
get packaged up into a SCSI task.
That SCSI task is then going to
get handed off to the SCSI protocol
driver layer and that's going
to get packaged up into the
appropriate for the target device.
So in the case of FireWire,
the SCSI task will get
turned into an orb.
The orb will be thrown out onto the bus,
processed.
It all happens asynchronously
and the completion routine
will fire back up the stack.
So, device compliance.
We really don't want you to
have to reinvent the wheel here.
By subclassing and adding
your device specific stuff,
you get power management,
you get driver lifecycle stuff,
hot plugging support,
all the termination,
all the gnarly undocumented stuff
that you really don't want to do.
What we mean by device compliance is
that your device will process commands
as they're documented in the command
sets in the official SCSI documentation.
Always override the whole stack.
All you need to do is outscore
the probe at the protocol
layer and do anything you want.
We will not prohibit that.
So what's supported in X as it ships
today is we have a TAPI support,
FireWire support, and USB support.
Ironically, we don't have SCSI parallel
support at this time.
It's a work in progress and we're
investigating it and working on it.
And ATA just doesn't apply because it
doesn't use a SCSI compliant command set.
In theory,
we were discussing that it would
be possible to actually make a
shim layer and wrap up ATA requests
and use our architecture,
but it added an extra layer
that we didn't want to take
the performance hit on.
So we decided to use a
monolithic ATA driver instead.
So, I want to grab some water.
Accessing Devices from Applications.
There's a lot of compelling
reasons you want to do this.
By resources we mean if you don't have
to wire memory down in the kernel,
we don't want to.
That's really precious stuff.
There's a much better tool
environment up in user space.
You have a source level debugger.
You have much better tools.
You don't have to use
GDB from the command line.
And system stability is another thing.
If you blow up in user space,
there's less of a statistic probability
you'll take the whole machine down.
If you blow up in the kernel,
it's much higher risk.
Examples would be utilities that
need to set some kind of intrinsic
device feature with a vendor specific
CDB and any out of kernel driver.
What I mean by that is
we ship a block storage,
a multimedia,
magnetic optical and a RBC logical
unit driver that are in kernel.
And if you have a tape drive,
which is a peripheral device
type one for sequential access,
it really doesn't need
to be in the kernel.
As a general rule of thumb,
if your device doesn't require booting
and it doesn't require a file system,
its driver does not need
to be in the kernel.
User clients are nothing more
than a mechanism to negotiate
the user kernel boundary.
There may be other places in this
big stack that you want to connect.
You might want to have a
user client connect to the
physical interconnect layer.
In the case of FireWire,
if you look in their SDK,
they have a user client that allows
you to connect to the SPP2 layer.
You might want to have a
utility that does firmware that
connects at a lower device,
or a lower point in the stack.
Also,
this is a good place to point this out,
on our website,
in the developer documentation,
there's a document called "Accessing
Hardware from User Space" that
just recently was updated and
went from like 50 to 100 pages.
And that's something you want
to really get your hands on,
especially because there's a summary
of the I/O Kit that's a lot more
extensive than what I've got into here.
I found it to be a good reference
for getting my head around some
of the basic concepts of I/O Kit.
The SCSI Task User-Client is
what we've implemented at our
layer for user-client access.
We have two access points.
We have the Peripheral
Device Type Nub access point.
If you think back to
the diagram I showed,
This is the point where you would attach
a non-in-kernel logical unit driver.
And we also have the generic
service layers for multimedia,
and this is for authoring.
and I'll get into more
details in the next slides.
The user client uses a
COM-like CFPlugin architecture.
Again, the document I just referenced,
the Accessing Hardware from User Space,
goes into some of the rules on that.
There are some tools that
we'll provide in the SDK to
show you how to do all that.
We have three interfaces
into our SCSI client.
The first one is the
MMC device interface.
This is only for the authoring needs.
It basically exists so you can
get device and media information
for the purposes of authoring.
We have a SCSI device interface
which lets you create,
release, and do all the maintenance
things that you need.
Create the callback handlers
and connect up the CF run loops,
etc.
And finally there's the
SCSI task interface.
Once you've actually connected up,
this is where you send and this
is the interface you use to send
raw SCSI tasks that encapsulate
the CDBs to drive your device.
So we have two access models.
We have an exclusive access model
and a non-exclusive access model.
Once you have instantiated
the user client,
that user client is the
logical unit driver.
So I'll have a diagram in a few slides
that will really bring this home.
But there are no restrictions.
The client has absolute control.
We don't filter or disallow
any kind of commands.
And this last point,
if you happen to be using the
generic services for multimedia,
the authoring APIs,
and you need to transition
to exclusive access,
what has to happen is you have
to unmount any mounted media,
any mounted partitions,
and obtain a reservation for that
media through disk arbitration.
And in our SDK,
we'll have an example code
to show how to do this.
The non-exclusive access model
is for the generic services
multimedia access point only.
This is, like I said before,
only to get device and media specific
information for the purposes of offering.
It is API driven.
You cannot send raw CDBs.
And if an existing client, a user client,
has got exclusive access,
it will not allow non-exclusive access.
So here's an example.
If we have a tape backup drive
that gets discovered by the
physical interconnect layer,
in this example it's FireWire again,
it would be instantiated and built
up and there'd be a SCSI protocol
driver instantiated and it would
build up and the I/O peripheral
device would issue an inquiry,
find out that it's a
peripheral device type 1,
populate the registry
with it and just stop.
Then what will happen is you will
launch an application up in user
space and the SCSI test user client
that we provide straddles the
user kernel boundary and once the
application is launched it will look
for the appropriate peripheral device
information through a command called,
I always get this wrong, IOServiceGet.
At that point the client application
is the logical unit driver
and it can drive that device.
The other interesting one is in the
case of authoring where we have a
DVD device that's been instantiated
up and we have an internal driver,
a peripheral device driver type 5
that's going to drive this device
and we might have been doing I/O to
it all day long and eventually an
application will get launched and
your user client will be-- this is
the second type I was talking about.
You can use the APIs to get device
information and media information
and in a non-exclusive fashion,
at some point you will have unmounted
the media and you will seize
control and become exclusive access.
You would again call the I/O,
create CFPlugin for service,
at which point the client application
has become the logical unit driver
and we will acquiesce the in kernel
peripheral device type driver 5.
So now the user client logical
unit driver has absolute
control over the device and
can do whatever it needs to do.
And in summary, it should be relatively
straightforward and easy for you to,
instead of having to ship gigantic
monolithic drivers for all of your stuff,
to bundle up and ship out strategic
small keks and make everybody happy.
resources.
So I've covered most of
this in the slides already.
There's nothing here that I haven't.
Later this week,
the IOC update was yesterday,
the PCI drivers are tomorrow morning.
FireWire in-depth and both USB in-depth
is a good place to go if you need to get
more information on bus specific stuff.
If you have a bridge that your company is
providing that has unique requirements,
it might be interesting or
helpful for you to go there.
I'll be there if anyone has any
protocol transport specific information
they'd like to ask me about.
Finally, we have a mailing list
that you can get on.
This is a place where we'll be making
announcements of where you can get
SDKs and help on everything we have.
If you have any questions at all,
please feel free to get
a hold of Craig Keithley.